My spirit compels me to speak of forms changed into new
bodies; oh gods, into my undertaking (for that, too, you changed)
breathe life, and from the first origin of the world 
to my own times, spin a continuous poem. 
Before the sea and lands, and that which covers all, heaven, 
there was one face of nature in all the world,
which they called Chaos: a shapeless and unorganized mass,
nothing except inactive weight and, piled together in the same place, 
discordant seeds of disjointed elements. 
No Titan-Sun was yet providing light to the world, 
nor was Phoebe-Moon restoring new horns by growing,
nor was the earth hanging in the superfluous air,
balanced by its own weight, nor had Amphitrite
extended her arms along the long rim of the lands;
and as there was both the earth in this place, and sea and air,
the land was such that it was unwalkable, the sea unswimmable, 
the air without light; nothing retained its own form,
and one element was fighting against the rest because in one unit,
cold things were fighting against warm things, wet with dry,
soft with hard, elements that weighed against ones that did not. 
Until a god and a better nature broke up this quarrel.
For he divided the lands from the sky and the waters from the lands,
and separated the liquid sky from the dense air.
After he unfolded these things and removed them from the blind mass,
he bound them to their places with an agreeable peace:
a fiery force flashed forth from the vaulted sky and without weight
made a place for itself in the highest point of the citadel;
the air is closest to it both in its weight and its location;
the earth is denser than these and it draws down the heavier elements
and it is pressed down by its own weight; flowing moisture
occupies the most distant areas and packs together the hard globe.
When he, whichever of the gods he was, 
divided the mass thus arranged, and reduced it, divided, into elements,
in the first place, lest it might be uneven in any part,
he collected the land into the appearance of a great sphere.
Then, that the straits should be spread out and swell with rapid winds,
he commanded, and that the shores surround the land on both sides;
he also added both fountains and immense pools,
and lakes, and with winding banks he girded sloping rivers,
which, in different places, are partly absorbed by the earth itself,
partly arrive into the sea; and, being received in the plain
of freer waters, beat against the shores instead of banks.
He also ordered that the plains be extended, the valleys sink down,
the woods be covered in leaves, the rocky mountains to rise,
and as heaven is divided on both the right and left by two zones, 
between which there is a fifth hotter than these,
thus did the god's care distinguish this enclosed mass by the same number,
and five corresponding zones are impressed into the earth.
Of those, that which is in the middle, cannot be inhabited due to heat;
deep snow covers two others; he placed the same number between both
and gave them a more temperate climate, mixed with heat and cold.
The air hangs over these, which, by as much more 
water weighs than earth, is as much heavier than fire.
He ordered clouds there and storms there to remain, 
and thunder that will stir human minds with terror,
lightning, and the winds that cause the cold.
Nor did the maker of the world permit these to occupy the sky;
even now they can scarcely be prevailed upon,
although each wind controls its own blasts in its own zone,
from tearing the world to pieces; so great is the rage and discord of brothers.
Eurus yielded to Aurora and the Nabataean kingdoms, 
and Persia, and the heights underlying the morning rays. 
The evening star, and the shores which are warmed by the setting sun,
are nearest to the Zephyr;
the hair-raising Boreas invaded Scythia and the north; the land opposite
grows wet through constant clouds and rainy Auster.
Over these he placed the aether, liquid and without weight, 
having nothing of earthly dregs whatsoever.
Scarcely had he divided all things in this way by their fixed boundaries,
when the stars, which had been for a long time oppressed under the 
dark haze, began to shine forth in the whole sky;
And lest any region might be destitute of its own animals,
stars and godly forms hold the celestial floor;
the waters yielded to be inhabited by glittering fish;
the land received wild beasts, and the moving air, birds.
An animal more sacred than these, and, of a higher mind, more capable,
and which might be able to dominate over the rest:
man was born; whether from a divine seed
that grand designer, in planning a better world, fashioned him,
or perhaps the nascent earth, recently severed from the heavenly sky,
retained some seeds of its kin.
As Prometheus, son of Iapetus, sprinkled the earth with raindrops,
and shaped it into the likeness of all the gods, 
and while the rest of the stooping animals are looking down at the earth,
this god gave man an elevated face and ordered him to behold the sky
and to raise his face to the stars:
Thus the earth, which was just recently raw and without form, 
having been changed, assumed the unknown figures of men.
The golden age was sown first, which, with no custodian,
of its own accord, without law, cultivated faith and virtue.
Punishment and fear were absent, nor were threatening words on fixed 
bronze gathered together, nor did the suppliant crowds fear
the looks of their judges, but were safe without a sheperd. 