Changes of shape, new forms, are the theme which my spirit impels me
now to recite. Inspire me, O gods (it is you who have even
transformed my art*), and spin me a thread from the world’s beginning
down to my own lifetime, in one continuous poem.
Before the earth and the sea and the all-encompassing heaven
came into being, the whole of nature displayed but a single
face, which men have called Chaos: a crude, unstructured mass,
nothing but weight without motion, a general conglomeration
of matter composed of disparate, incompatible elements.
No Titan the sun god was present to cast his rays on the universe,
nor Phoebe the moon to replenish her horns and grow to her fullness;
no earth suspended in equilibrium, wrapped in its folding
mantle of air; nor Amphitríte, the goddess of ocean,
to stretch her sinuous arms all round the earth’s long coastline.
Although the land and the sea and the sky were involved in the great
mass, no one could stand on the land or swim in the waves of the sea,
and the sky had no light. None of the elements kept its shape,
and all were in conflict inside one body: the cold with the hot,
the wet with the dry, the soft with the hard, and weight with the weightless.
The god, or a kinder nature, brought this dispute to a
settlement. He severed earth from sky, sea from land;
he separated translucent space from the cloudier atmosphere.
He disentangled the elements, so as to set them free
from the heap of darkness, then gave them their 
separate places and tied them
down in a peaceful concordat: fire flashed out as a weightless
force in the vaulted heaven and found its rightful place
at the height of the firmament; air came next in position and lightness;
earth was denser than these, attracted the larger particles
and sank through the downward thrust of its weight; in the nether region
came water, confining the solid disc in its liquid embrace.
When the god, whichever one of the gods, had divided the substance
of Chaos and ordered it thus in its different constituent members,
first, in order that earth should hang suspended in perfect
symmetrical balance, he moulded it into the shape of a great sphere.
Next he commanded the seas to scatter and swell as they fronted
the blast of the winds, surrounding the earth with its circle of shore.
To the ocean he added the springs, huge standing pools and the lakes,
and rivers to wind downstream as their sloping banks confined them.
These in their various places may be absorbed by the earth itself,
or travel as far as the sea, where they enter the broad expanse
of more open water and beat on the shore instead of their banks.
Then he commanded the plains to extend and the valleys to sink,
the woods to be decked in their leaves and the rock-faced mountains to soar.
And just as the sky is cut into zones, with two to northward,
two to the south and a fifth which burns with more heat than the others,
so with the earth which the sky encloses: the god in his wisdom
ordained five separate zones* or tracts to be traced on its surface.
The central zone is too hot for men to inhabit the region;
two are buried in snow; but two he placed in between,
and thus he blended the heat with the cold in a temperate climate.
Hanging over the lands is the air, whose weight exceeds
that of fire by as much as the weight of earth exceeds that of water.
It was here that the god commanded the mists and the clouds to settle,
here that he posted the thunder to trouble the hearts of men,
with the winds which cause the lightning that burns and the lightning that
flashes. Still the creator did not allow the winds dominion
over the whole wide range of air. As it is, they can scarcely
be stopped from tearing the world to pieces, though each of them governs
his blasts in a distant quarter; so angrily brothers can quarrel.
Eurus’ retreat is the home of the dawn, from the realms of Arabia
and Persia through to the mountains* that gleam in the morning sunlight;
Zephyr is close to the evening and fans the shores that are warmed
by the setting sun. Bóreas, lord of the blizzard, sweeps
into Scýthia, land of the frozen north; while Auster, opposite,
drenches the soil of the south with his clouds of incessant rain.
Above the turbulent lower air the creator imposed
the weightless translucent ether, untainted by earthly pollution.
Nature had hardly been settled within its separate compartments
when stars, which had long been hidden inside the welter of Chaos,
began to explode with light all over the vault of the heavens.
And lest any part of the world should be wanting its own living creatures,
the floor of heaven was richly inlaid with the stars and the planets,
the waves of the sea were assigned as the realm of the glinting fishes,
the earth was the home of the beasts, and the yielding air of the birds.
Yet a holier living creature, more able to think high thoughts,
which could hold dominion over the rest, was still to be found.
So Man came into the world. Maybe the great artificer
made him of seed divine in a plan for a better universe.
Maybe the earth that was freshly formed and newly divorced
from the heavenly ether retained some seeds of its kindred element –
earth, which Prométheus, the son of Iápetus, sprinkled with raindrops
and moulded into the likeness of gods who govern the universe.
Where other animals walk on all fours and look to the ground,
man was given a towering head and commanded to stand
erect, with his face uplifted to gaze on the stars of heaven.
Thus clay, so lately no more than a crude and formless substance,
was metamorphosed to assume the strange new figure of Man.
First to be born was the Golden Age. Of its own free will,
without laws or enforcement, it did what was right and trust prevailed.
Punishment held no terrors; no threatening edicts were published
in tablets of bronze; secure with none to defend them, the crowd
never pleaded or cowered in fear in front of their stern-faced judges.