Of new embodied shapes transformed, my mind 
Is moved to speak! O gods (for you have shaped 
These matters, too) inspire what I’ve begun 
And draw the first creation of the world 
Down to our times in one unbroken song. 
Before there were seas, lands, and arching skies, 
Throughout the whole world nature bore one face, 
Which was called Chaos, an unordered, rough 
And tumble mass of lifeless weight, wherein 
Lay packed the jangling elemental seeds. 
No Titan then brought sunlight to the earth, 
No Phoebe yet wrought full her lunar curve; 
Nor hung the Earth self-poised in swaddling air, 
As Amphitrite’s waves embraced her banks. 
For though the land, the sea, and air were there, 
The land could bear no tread, the waves no stroke, 
The mist no light. No being retained its shape 
And each opposed with each, for in one self 
Heat battled cold, wet strove with dry, soft parts 
Struck against hard, and weight fought weightless things.
A god and better nature broke this strife. 
He tore the lands from sky and seas from land, 
And from the dense air split the crystal heaven. 
Then, after he released the separate forms, 
Plucked from that sightless mass, he fastened them 
In place with common peace. Next, weightless fire 
Leapt up and claimed its place in vaulting heaven, 
With air beneath, the next by lightness placed. 
But denser earth sank under its own weight 
And drew down heavy masses by its side. 
The circling water took hold last of all 
And wrapped the solid earth within its flow.
Once he—whichever of the gods he was—
Had so reduced the whole to living parts, 
He spun the land into a giant sphere, 
And to begin, lest all sides be alike, 
He ordered straits to stream and swell beneath 
The sweeping winds and clasp the circled earth. 
And he made springs and lakes and boundless pools 
And tilted banks hemmed in by slanting streams, 
A share of which the earth absorbs; the rest 
Runs to the sea where, in a freer flood, 
It pounds no banks but breaks on ocean shores. 
He ordered fields unrolled and valleys sunk, 
The forests wreathed with leaves, the mountains raised; 
And, as two regions on both left and right 
Divide the sky (a fiery fifth between), 
So did the might of god segment its load: 
The same five bounds are stamped upon the earth. 
The middle zone is home to heat alone, 
The outer two to snow, but those between 
He gave both flame and frost in measured fare, 
And over all, the air—as great a weight 
Compared to fire as water feels from earth. 
He ordered there the mists and there the clouds, 
And thunder, soon to frighten mortal minds, 
And, mixed with bolts of light, the flashing 
Winds. To them, the maker did not grant the air 
Outright (for even now, when each one blows 
In his own realm, those brothers quarrel so 
They scarce withhold from shattering the world). 
So Eurus sought Arabian lands of dawn 
And Persian peaks aglow with morning rays, 
While near the western shores by sunset warmed, 
Dwells Zephyrus; and wintry Boreas seized 
The Scythian North, while southern lands drip wet 
With constant clouds and rain by Auster’s hand. 
Above them all, the god let aether flow, 
A liquid lacking weight or earthly trace. 
Such boundaries he had scarcely set in place 
Before the stars, which had so long been crushed 
In sightless gloom, began to light the sky. 
And, lest some realm be left devoid of life, 
The stars and godly forms took hold of heaven; 
The waves made way to house bright schools of fish, 
Beasts gained the earth, and birds the fluid sky. 
But still there lacked one holier than these, 
A creature fit for thought to rule them all: 
The human race was born. Perhaps it was 
That same creator’s sacred seed that brought 
A better world; or maybe the fresh earth, 
New-rent from aether, kept some seeds from heaven, 
Which, washed by waves, the son of Iapetus 
Shaped in the image of almighty gods; 
And downward though all other beasts may gaze, 
He gave to man a face turned toward the sky, 
And bade him stand and look upon the stars. 
And so the earth, but lately crude and bare, 
Was changed and clothed with unknown human forms. 
A Golden Age came first, when with no laws 
And no enforcers, good faith freely reigned. 
No punishments were feared; no warning words 
Were read on plaques of bronze; no frightened crowd 
Faced judgment kneeling—peace was unenforced. 
Not yet were pine-trees, seeking foreign lands, 
Hewn down their mountainsides to part the waves, 
For mortals knew of no shores save their own. 
Not yet did sheer-cut trenches circle towns; 
No brazen trumpets straight, no twisting horns, 
Nor helms nor swords were there, nor need for arms: 
The nations lived in safe unwarring ease. 
The Earth, untouched by plough and ploughshare wounds, 
Herself gave all from self, and men, full pleased 
With fare won free, plucked bitter strawberries 
On mountainsides, hard cherries, thorny fruits, 
And acorns dropped from Jove’s wide-spreading tree. 
Spring saw no end. With gentle warming breath, 
The Zephyrs brushed through flowers that bloomed unsown, 
And soon, the untilled land brought forth its fruit, 
While never-fallow fields grew white with grain. 
And streams of milk by streams of nectar rolled, 
While groves of verdant oaks dripped honeyed gold. 