My spirit drives me to tell of forms changed into new bodies.
Gods, blow kindly on my beginnings (for you altered also those forms)
And lead down the perpetual song
From the first origin of the world to my own time.
Before the sea and the lands and the sky which covers all, 
There was a single visage of nature in the entire globe,
Which they called Chaos, a mass rough and unordered,
Not anything but inert weight and
Discordant seeds of matter heaped in one and not well joined together.
No Titan as yet showed forth light to the world, 
Nor did Phoebe reshape new horns with crescents,
Nor did the earth, balanced by its weight,
Hang in the air that had been poured round about it,
Nor had Amphitrite encircled the distant ends of the earth in its arms.
Where* there was land, so also there was air and sea, 
And so the land could not be trod upon, the wave was not swimmable,
The air lacking light. Nothing retained its own form.
One thing stood in opposition to the others, since in one body
Cold fought with heat, wet with dry,
Softness with hardness, weightiness with weightlessness. 
God and a better nature separated this strife:
For he severed the earth from the sky and the sea from the land,
And he set apart the ethereal sky from the dense vapors.
After God released and freed these elements from the blind heap,
He bound them, now rent asunder, in their places by a harmonious peace. 
The fiery might of the vaulted and weightless sky
Flashed up and took for itself a position in the highest citadel.
The air is next to it in lightness and in place.
The land, more dense than these elements, dragged down the big elements,
And was pressed down by its own weight; the streaming water 
Took possession of the last and confined the solid globe.
So when some god or other had separated and arranged this chaos,
And ordered it thus divided into its parts,
From the beginning he molded the earth, lest it should not be equal on every side, 
Into the form of a great ball. 
Then he poured out the channels and ordered them to rise up when the rapid winds gust,
And he ordered them to go round about the shores of the encircled earth.
He added springs and great stagnant pools and lakes,
And he enclosed the rivers flowing downward within zigzag banks,
Which, in diverse journeys, are partly swallowed by the earth, 
And partly flow down to the sea and, received into the expanse of freer water,
Strike against shores instead of banks.
And he ordered plains to be stretched out, valleys to subside,
The forests to be clothed in foliage, and craggy mountains to rise up.
And as two zones cut the celestial vault on the right and the left section, 
While the fifth is hotter than these,
Thus God’s care separated the weight and enclosed it in the same number,
And the same number of tracks was impressed upon the earth.
The one amongst these in the middle is not inhabitable due to heat.
High snow covers two; the same number he placed between both, 
And gave them a temperate climate, mingling flame with cold.
The air hangs over these, which to the degree that air is lighter than the weight of land,
Than the weight of water, by so much is it heavier than fire.
There he ordered the mists and clouds to take their place,
And thunder, which terrifies human minds, 
And winds with lightning that produce thunder.
The maker of the world also did not allow them to dwell freely in the air.
Scarcely now can they be prevented,
Even though each controls his blast in a different track,
From tearing apart the earth. Such is the discord of brothers. 
Eurus drew off to the land of the dawn and the Arabian lands,
And where the Persian crests lie beneath the morning rays.
The West and those shores which lie warm with the setting sun
Are next to the Zephyr; bristling Boreas
Marched to Scythia and the Wain. The land opposite 
Lies damp with constant clouds and rain because of the South Wind.
Over these he placed the liquid and weightless ether,
Having no part of earthly dregs.
Scarcely had he divided all things into certain boundaries,
When the stars, which had lay hidden pressed down by that mass 
Began to gleam throughout the sky.
Lest any region be bereft of its own animals,
The stars and the forms of the gods held the heavenly land,
The waves fell to the shining fish to be dwelt in,
The land took the wild beasts; the mobile air, the birds. 
An animal more holy than these and more possessed of profound mind,
And one who could dominate the rest, was as yet lacking.
Man was born, whether that maker of things, the origin of a better world,
Made him from divine seed,
Or the recent earth, just recently drawn away from heavenly ether, 
Retained the seeds of its relation, the sky.
The offspring of Iapetus mixed this with river waters
And crafted it into the image of the gods who direct all things.
While other beasts look downward toward the earth,
God gave a lofty countenance to man and ordered him 
To look upon the sky and to raise his erect visage to the stars.
Thus the land, which had but lately been rough and formless,
Transformed, took on the unknown shapes of men.
Golden was engendered the first age, which, without an avenger,
Of its own accord, without law, cherished faith, and uprightness. 
[Punishment and fear were absent, nor were threatinging words
Incised on the cut bronze, nor did the suppliant crowd fear
The face of its own judge, but they were safe without a defender.*]
Not yet had the pine, cut down, descended from its own mountains
Into the watery waves to visit foreign lands. 
Mortals knew of no shores but theirs.
High ditches did not yet encircle towns,
Nor yet were there trumpets of straight brass, horns of curved brass,
Nor helmets, nor swords: without the employment of soldiers,
Men enjoyed gentle leisure securely. 
The soil itself without compulsion, untouched by plow
Nor injured by any plowshare, granted everything willingly.
Content with berries brought forth without compulsion,
Men gathered the fruit of trees or mountain strawberries,
Cherries, berries hanging on the harsh bramble, 
And acorns, which fell from the spreading tree of Jupiter.
Spring was eternal, and the gentle Zephyrs with their warm breezes
Played with the flowers born without seeds.
Then even the earth untilled bore crops,
And the field, not fallowed, stood white with heavy shafts. 
Rivers of milk, rivers of nectar flowed,
And yellow honey was distilled from the green oak.
After the world was under the dominion of Jupiter,
And Saturn had been cast down into shadowy Hades, the silver race came in,
Meaner than the Golden Age, but more precious than tawny brass. 
Jupiter shortened the season of ancient spring,
And through winter, summer, unequal autumn and brief spring,
Cut up the year into its four seasons.
Then first of all did the air, burnt by parching heat, grow white,
And ice hung down congealed by the winds. 
Then for the first time men sought out houses: the houses were caves,
And dense thickets and branches joined with bark.
Then for the first time the seeds of grain were buried in long furrows,
Oxen groaned in service beneath the yoke.
After this followed the third offspring, bronze, 
More savage in character and more ready for horrid war,
Yet not wicked. The final age was of hard iron.
At once all evil burst forth into this age of worse metal,
Shame, truth, faith fled,
And in their place came fraud and deceit, 
Treachery and might, and wicked love of possessions.
The sailor gave his sail to the winds, though as yet he scarcely knew them.
Ships, which for a long time had stood in the lofty mountains,
Bobbed in the unknown waves.
The careful measurer marked out the earth with his long boundary line — 
The earth which before had been held in common like the light of the sun or breezes.
Nor were only crops and the owed food demanded
From the rich earth. One went down to the bowels of the earth,
And whatever riches she had removed and hidden in the Stygian gloom
Were dug up, the enticement for evil. 
And now injurious iron and gold, more injurious than iron,
Had burst forth; war marched forth—war which battles both,
And shook its clashing arms with bloody hand.
One lived from plunder, guest not safe from guest,
Nor father-in-law from son-in-law; also kindness among brothers was rare. 
The husband plotted destruction for his wife, the wife for her husband;
Frightening mothers-in-law stirred up ghastly aconite.
Sons inquired into the years of their fathers before time.
Reverence lay vanquished, and the maiden Astraea, the last of the gods,
Left the earth as it dripped with blood. 
Lest the lofty ether be more secure than the earth,
They say that giants attacked the heavenly kingdom
And built and piled up mountains to the high stars.
When the almighty father, hurling his thunderbolt, shattered Olympus
And shook down Mount Pelion lying beneath Mount Ossa.* 
When the harsh bodies lay overwhelmed by the mass,
They say that the earth, drenched with much blood of her children,
Was wet and gave life to that warm gore,
And lest no memorial of her offspring should stay,
Turned it into the appearance of men. But also this new stock 
Was a despiser of the gods, most eager for savage slaughter,
And violent. You might know it was born from blood.
When the Saturnian father saw these things from his lofty citadel,
He groaned, and recalling the base feast of Lycaon’s table,
Not yet widely known because the deed was recent, 
He conceived a great wrath worthy of Jove,
And he called together a meeting. No delay held those called to assembly.
There is a lofty way, easy to see in the cloudless sky;
Milky is its name, famed for its clarity.
Along this way is the path for the gods to the halls of the great Thunderer 
And his royal house. On the right and on the left
The halls of the noble gods are thronged with guests, their hinges wide open.
The common folk live apart in separate places. From the brow the powerful dwellers in heaven
And the renowned gods have placed their household gods.
This is the place which, if daring might be granted to words, 
I would scarcely fear to call the palace of the great king.
Therefore, when the gods had taken their seats in the marble recess,
He himself, on a higher throne and leaning on his ivory scepter,
Shook three and four times the terrifying locks on his head
By which he stirs the earth, sea, and the stars. 
Then, in such strains he released his indignant lips:
“I was not more anxious for the kingdom of the world
At that storm when each one of the snake-footed ones
Prepared to lay their hundred arms on captive heaven.
For although the enemy was fierce, yet the whole assault 
Sprang from one body and from one source.
Now, wherever Nereus rings round about the entire globe,
I must annihilate the race of men. I swear
By that river flowing beneath the ground in the Stygian grove,
All things should first be tried, but the wound which cannot be cured 
Must be cut out lest the healthy part be infected.
There are demigods, rustic deities, Nymphs,
Fauns, and Satyrs, and sylvan deities on mountain tops.
Since we do not yet deign to grant them divinity,
Let us allow them to dwell certainly in the lands which we have given. 
Or do you think, ye Gods, that they will be safe enough,
When Lycaon, known for his savagery, has hatched a plan
Against me, who possesses the thunderbolt and rules over you?”
All trembled, and with eager zeal demanded the punishment
From the one who had dared such deeds. So when the impious hand 
Raged to stamp out the Roman name with Caesarean blood,
The human race was astonished by such fear
Of swift destruction, and the whole world shuddered in horror.
Nor is this loyalty of your subjects, Augustus, less pleasing to you
Than that was to Jupiter. After he checked their outcry 
With voice and gesture, and all held silence,
When now the cry had subsided, checked by the force of the ruler,
Jupiter again broke the silence with these words:
“Indeed he has paid the penalty, lay aside that care,
Yet I shall instruct what was the fault, what was the punishment. 
A bad report of the age had reached my ears.
Hoping it would prove false, I slipped down from Olympus
And, though a god, walked on earth in human form.
Long would be the delay to enumerate what great wickedness was found everywhere,
The report was less than reality. 
I had crossed Maenala, bristling with the hiding places of wild beasts,
The thickets of cold Lycaeus along with Cyllene,
Whence I approached the inhospitable halls of the Arcadian ruler,
Just as the late twilight was ushering in the night.
I gave signs that a god had come, and the common people began to pray. 
Lycaon first scoffed at their pious prayers.
Then he said, “I shall find out in a clear test
Whether he is a god or a mortal. Nor will the truth be in doubt.”
He prepares to kill me at night as I lie in a deep sleep
With a death not expected. This trial of what was true pleased him. 
Nor was he content with that, but he cut the throat
Of a hostage sent from the Molossian race with the tip of the sword,
And, thus, partly he softened his limbs half dead in boiling water,
In part he roasted them over the fire placed below.
As soon as he placed this on the table, I, with my avenging fire, 
Brought down the house and the deserving Penates* upon the master.
He fled, terrified, and, gaining the silence of the countryside,
He howled and in vain tried to speak. From him
His mouth gathers foam and with its desire for usual slaughter
Turns to the flocks and now also delights in blood. 
His clothes are transformed into coat, his arms into legs,
He becomes a wolf and guards the traces of his old form.
There is the same gray hair, the same violence in his face,
The same eyes shine forth, the same image of wildness.
One house has fallen, but not one house deserved to perish, 
The wild Erinyes reign supreme wherever earth extends.
You would think they had all conspired for crime. Let all swiftly give
The punishment they deserve. Thus stands the decision.”
Part approved of Jove’s speech with their voice and added
Fuel to his wrath; others played their part by giving assent. 
And yet all grieved at the casting off of the human race,
And they asked what would be the form of the world
Bereft of mortals. Who would place incense on the altars?
Or was he planning to hand the earth over to the wild beasts to despoil?
As they asked such things (for the rest should be his concern), 
The king of the gods ordered them not to fear, and he promised
Another race of wondrous origin, different from the previous.
And now he was about to hurl his thunderbolt on the entire earth.
But he feared lest by chance the sacred ether
Might catch fire from the flames, and the entire pole might burn. 
He recalled also that it was fated that a time would come
When the sea and the earth and kingdom of heaven would be seized
And would catch alight, and the carefully constructed mass of the world would totter.
He laid aside his weapons, forged by the hands of the Cyclopes.
He preferred a different punishment: to annihilate the human race beneath the waves
And to send down rain from the entire sky.
Straightway he shuts Aquilo up in the cave of Aeolus
And whatever blasts put to flight the assembled clouds.
He lets loose Notus. The South Wind flies with dripping wings,
His awful face shrouded in pitchy fog. 
His beard is heavy with rain; water flows from his gray locks;
Clouds rest upon the brow; and his wings and garments are wet with dew.
And when he compresses with his hand the clouds lying broadly round about,
A crashing sound comes forth, and dense clouds pour down rain from the sky.
Iris, Juno’s messenger, clothed in many hues, 
Draws up the water and brings nourishment to the clouds.
Crops are flattened, and the hopes, given up as lost by the farmers,
Lie low. The work of the long year has perished and comes to nothing.
Nor is the wrath of Jove content with his own sky,
But his sea-blue brother assists him with auxiliary waters. 
He summons the rivers, to whom, after they entered
The halls of their own tyrant, he says: “No need now
For long encouragement. Pour out your might,
So is there great need! Open houses, remove all impediment,
Let loose your reins to your rivers.” 
He ordered. They return and let loose the mouths of the fountains,
And in an unbridled course go down to the sea.
He struck the earth with his trident; she
Trembled, and with the stroke uncovered a way for the water.
The rivers leap beyond bounds through the open plains 
And, along with crops, sweep away orchards, herds, men,
Dwellings, and shrines with their sacred contents.
If any house stayed and was able to resist such an evil
Not overthrown,* yet a higher wave covers its rooftop.
Towers lie hidden, pressed beneath the stream. 
And now the land and sea had no divide,
Everything was sea, and the sea lacked shores.
This one seeks a hilltop; another sits in his hooked skiff
And plies the oars there where just recently he had plowed.
That one sails over crops or the top of his house now submerged. 
This one takes a fish in the top of the elm.
And an anchor, if chance so bore, was stuck in a green meadow,
Or curved ships cover vineyards below them.
And where lately slender goats cropped the meadow,
Now deformed sea calves place their bodies. 
Nereids marvel at groves and cities and houses
Beneath the water, and dolphins cling to tall trees and brush against
The lofty branches and shake the oak trees as they knock against them.
The wolf swims among sheep, while the wave conveys tawny lions,
The wave conveys tigers, nor is the might of the thunderbolt of any help 
To the boar, nor his swift limbs to the deer as he is carried off.
The wandering bird on tired wing,
After long seeking land where it is able to perch, falls into the sea.
The immense freedom of the sea buried the hillocks,
And new waves beat against mountain mounds. 
The greatest part is taken by the wave. Those spared by the wave
Long hunger overcomes because of lack of food.
The land of Phocis separates the Aonian from the Oetean fields,
A fruitful land while it was land. But at that time,
It formed part of the sea and a broad field of sudden water. 
There a lofty mountain with twin peaks reaches for the stars.
Its name is Parnassus, and its peaks conquer the clouds.
Here when (for the sea had covered all else) Deucalion with his wife
Was carried in a small boat and clung to the mountain,
He prayed to the Corycian nymphs, and the mountain deities 
And fate-revealing Themis, who at that time kept the oracles.
There was no better man, no one more scrupulous of right, than he,
Or anyone more reverent of the gods than she.
When Jupiter saw that the world was one stagnant pool,
And from just now so many thousands of men, one survived, 
And from just now so many thousands of women, one survived,
Both guiltless and both devoted to the gods,
He cast down the clouds, and, when they had been swept away by the North Wind,
Revealed the land to the sky and the air to the land.
Nor did the anger of the sea remain. Setting aside his three-pronged weapon,
The ruler of the sea calms the waters, and he calls sea-blue Triton,
Who stands over the sea, his shoulders clothed in indigenous shellfish.
He orders him to blow on his resounding shell
And to call back now, with the signal given, the waves and rivers.
He takes up the hollow shell, which grows from the bottom of a spiral 
Twisting on the side—
The hollow shell which, when in mid sea, it has received air,
Fills with its voice the shores that lie beneath either Phoebus.
So then, when it touched the lips of the god, dripping with his wet beard,
And, filled with air, sounded forth the retreats which had been ordered, 
All the waters of the earth and sea heard it,
And it held in check all the waters that heard it.
Now the sea has a shore, the channel keeps the full banks,
The rivers subside, and hills arise.
The land rises up; places increase as the water decreases. 
And after the long day the forests show their denuded tops
And hold the slime left on the foliage.
The circle was restored. After he saw the world open,
And the desolated lands betook a deep silence,
Deucalion addresses Pyrrha tearfully: 
“O sister, O wife, O sole woman who survives,
Whom common race and family origin
And also the bed join, now also do dangers join.
We two are the crowd of lands whatever sunset and sunrise see,
The sea holds everything else. 
And this hold which we have on life is not yet sufficiently strong.
Even now clouds terrify the mind.
What would now be your spirit, O one to be pitied,
If you had been snatched from fate without me? How would you alone
Have been able to cope with fear? Who would have consoled you in your grief?
For trust me, if the sea should have you also,
I would follow you, my wife, and the sea would possess me also.
O would that I could restore the people by my father’s arts,
And place life into molded clay.
Now the whole mortal race remains in the two of us. 
Thus it seemed good to the gods. We remain examples of mankind.”
He had spoken, and they wept. It was pleasing to pray
To the divine will and to seek help through sacred lots.
There was no delay. They both went to Cephisus’s waters.
But these were not yet clear, though they flowed within familiar banks. 
From there, when they had poured out water in a ritual fashion
And sprinkled it on their garments and head, they turned their steps to the temple
Of the holy goddess, whose gables were dark with foul moss
And whose altars stood without flame.
When they both touched the steps of the temple, each falls 
Headlong on the ground and in fear kisses the cold stone.
And thus said, “If gods are influenced and softened by just prayers,
If the wrath of gods is turned,
Say, Themis, by what skill the loss of our race
May be repaired, and, most kindly one, bring aid to things submerged.” 
The goddess was moved and gave an oracle: “Leave the temple
And cover the head and loosen bound garments
And cast behind the back the bones of your great parent.”
For awhile they stood thunderstruck: Pyrrha first
Breaks the silence with her voice and refuses to obey the orders of the goddess,
And with trembling lip she asks for pardon, and she fears
To hurt her mother’s shade by casting out her bones.
In the meantime, they go over the obscure words of the oracle given
In the dark secret byways, and they turn them over and over amongst themselves.
The son of Prometheus comforts the daughter of Epimetheus 
With gentle words: “Either our wit is faulty,
Or the oracles are holy and counsel no evil.
The earth is our great parent. I believe the rocks in the body of the earth to be called bones.
We are ordered to cast these behind our backs.”
Although the Titanian was moved by the prophecy of her husband, 
Yet hope was in doubt. So much did both
Distrust heavenly advice. But what harm was there in trying?
They leave, veil their heads, and loosen their tunics,
And send the ordered rocks behind the tracks.
And those rocks (who would believe this except that tradition acted as witness?)
Began to lose their hardness and their stiffness,
And to grow soft slowly and, once softened, to take on form.
And soon, when they had grown and a softer nature
Came upon them, a certain form of man could be seen,
Not clear, but as if begun from marble 
Not sufficiently hewn and like rough images.
That part of them, however, wet and earthy with slight juice,
Was changed into corporal use.
That which was solid and not able to be bent, was turned into bone;
What a while ago was vein stayed under the same name. 
And in a short while by the power of the gods
The rocks cast by the hands of man took on the appearance of men,
While woman was refurnished by the casting of woman.
Hence we are a hard race and enduring of toil,
And we give evidence from what origin we sprang. 
The earth gave birth to all other animals in diverse forms
Of its own accord, after the ancient wetness grew warm
From the fire of the sun, and the slime and wet marshlands
Swelled with heat, and the fertile seeds of matter,
Nourished in the living soil, as though in the womb of a mother, 
Increased and gradually took on a certain appearance.
Just as when the seven-mouthed Nile has left the wet fields
And has returned to its ancient bed,
And the fresh mud is warmed by the heavenly star,
Farmers find many animals as they turn the soil, 
Among these, some they see have just been delivered
Through the very cycle of birthing; some they see unfinished,
Short in their shoulders, and often in the same body
One part lives, the other part is raw soil.
Indeed, wetness and heat, once they have taken on due proportion, 
Conceive, and from these two qualities all things arise.
And though fire is opposed to water, still moist vapor
Creates all things, and inharmonious harmony is suitable for offspring.
Therefore, when the earth, muddied from the recent flood,
Glowed again from the rays of the sun and the lofty heat, 
It brought forth multiple species: in part, it brought back
Ancient forms; in part, it created new monsters.
And though she, indeed, would not wish it, she gave birth then also to you,
Great Python, a snake unknown to new peoples,
And you were a terror. So much mountain space you held. 
The archer god, previously having used such weapons
Only on deer and fleeting goats,
Killed it, heavy with a thousand shafts, his quiver nearly exhausted.
And poison poured out through the black wounds.
And lest age wipe out the fame of the deed, 
He instituted sacred games with renowned contests
Called “Pythian” from the name of that subdued snake.
Here, whichever youth had conquered with hand, with foot,
With wheel, received the honor of the oak garland.
The laurel did not yet exist. Phoebus wreathed the comely long locks 
With leaves from whatever tree.
Phoebus’s first love was Peneian Daphne,
Whom unwitting luck did not give but the savage wrath of Cupid.
The Delian god, proud because of the conquered serpent,
Had seen him flexing his bow with the string drawn tight, and had said, 
“O frivolous boy, what is your concern with mighty weapons?
This gear becomes our shoulders,
Who gives certain wounds to wild beast and to enemies,
Who but now laid low the Python pressing down so many acres
With its blighted belly, and swollen with so many arrows. 
But you, be content to stir up some love or other with your torch.
Do not lay claim to my fame!”
Venus’s son answered him, “Phoebus, your weapon may strike all things;
Mine you. By as much as every creature yields to divine power,
So shall your glory be less than ours.” 
He spoke, and as the air was struck by his beating wings,
Quick he stood on the shady citadel of Parnassus.
And he drew from his quiver two weapons
That produce different results. This one puts love to flight, while this one inspires love.
The one that inspires is golden and glistens at its sharp tip; 
The one that puts to flight is blunt and has lead on its tip.
The god implanted this one in the Peneian nymph. But with that one
He wounded the innermost marrow of Apollo, transfixing the bone.
At once the one loves, the other flees the name of lover,
Rejoicing in the hiding places of the forests and 
In the trophies of caught beasts, a rival of unwed Phoebe.
A ribbon bound her hair arranged with abandon.
Many sought her, but spurning those seeking,
Neither enduring or knowing men, she wandered the pathless woodlands
Nor cared what love, what Hymen, what was marriage. 
Often, her father said: “My daughter, you owe me a son-in-law.”
And often, he said: “My daughter, you owe me offspring.”
Yet she hated the torches of wedlock as though they were a sin,
And a modest blush tinged her fair cheeks,
As she clung to her father’s neck with her coaxing arms 
And said: “Daddy dearest, let me enjoy virginity forever.
Her father has granted this to Diana.”
He indeed grants her wish, but your loveliness thwarts your desire
And your figure fights against your prayer.
Phoebus loves and desires to wed Daphne as soon as she was seen. 
He hopes for what he desires. His own oracles cheat him.
As light stubble is set ablaze after the grain is harvested,
As hedges burn because of torches, which by chance a traveler
Has placed too close or has left behind at dawn,
So the god was consumed with flames, thus in his whole heart 
He burned, and he nourished a hopeless love on hope.
He looked at her hair hanging unadorned on her neck
And said: “What if they were done up?” He sees her eyes
Glistening with fire like stars, her little mouth
—not enough just to see—he praises her fingers and hands 
And arms and upper arms naked more than in the middle part.
If anything is hidden, he thinks it better. But she flees more swift
Than light breeze, nor does she halt in response to these words of the one calling after:
“Peneian nymph, please stay! I follow you not as an enemy.
Nymph, remain! Thus the lamb, the wolf; thus the deer, the lion; 
Thus the dove flees the eagle on fearful wing.
Each flees its enemy. Love is the reason for pursuing.
Woe is me! Please don’t fall. Do not let the briars
Graze your legs unworthy of being injured, or let me be the cause of your distress.
The places where you are rushing are rough. I beg you, 
Run more slowly. Check your flight, and I shall follow more slowly.
Yet look at who loves you. I am no mountain dweller,
Nor am I a shepherd, nor unkempt do I watch over herds and flocks.
Rash one, you do not know, you do not know
From whom you flee (she was indeed fleeing). The land of Delphi 
And Claros and Tenedos and Patara are my realms.
Father is Jove. I tell what will be, what was,
And what is. I shape the harmony of song to strings.
Indeed, ours is sure, but one arrow is surer than ours
And has wounded the empty heart. 
Medicine is my discovery, and I am called “craftsman” throughout the world,
And we have control over the power of herbs.
Woe is me, since no love can be cured by herbs,
Nor are those arts which aid all of any aid to their master.”
He intended to say more, but the Peneian one fled in timid step 
And left him and his imperfect words.
And then she seemed beautiful. The winds revealed the body,
And the clothes cast back fluttered in the opposing breezes,
And light air flung her hair streaming behind.
By flight her beauty was enhanced. But indeed the youthful god 
Could no longer stand to waste his flattery, and, just as love advised,
He followed her with quick step.
As when a Gallic hound has seen a hare in an empty field,
And this one seeks his prey with his feet, while that one seeks safety,
Now, now already the one seems on the point of grabbing and hopes to hold,
And extending his snout grazes the tracks,
The other wonders whether she has been taken and,
As though snatched from his very jaws, leaves behind the mouth that touches,
So the god and the girl: this one is swift in hope, the other in fear.
Yet he who pursues, aided by the wings of love, 
Is swifter, gives no respite, and, hot on the back of the one fleeing,
Breathes on her hair spread round on her neck.
Her strength sapped, she was pale and
Overwhelmed by the toil of the quick flight, gazing at the waters of Peneus,
She said: “Daddy, help! If you rivers are divine,* 
By which I pleased too much, O land,” she said, “gape open,
Or lose and change that figure which causes me to be harmed.”
She barely finished the prayer when a heavy languor seized her limbs,
Her soft bosom was enveloped in thin fiber,
Her hair into leaves, her arms grow into branches. 
Her feet, once so swift, cling to sluggish roots.
Her mouth holds the top. A singular radiance remains.
Phoebus loves her still, and, placing his right hand on the trunk,
He feels her breast still warm beneath the new bark.
Embracing with his arms the branches like limbs, 
He kissed the wood. Yet the wood drew back from the kiss.
To whom the god: “But since you cannot be my wife,
You will certainly be my tree. O laurel tree, my hair,
The lyre, and our quivers will possess you.
You will attend the happy leaders when the joyful voice 
Sings out ‘Triumph,’ and the Capitol sees long processions.
You will be the faithful guardian of the august doors.
You shall stand before the doors and guard the oak standing in the middle.
As my head is youthful, my locks unshorn,
So, you also, wear always the perpetual beauty of your leaf!” 
The Paean had finished his speech, and the laurel nodded in assent
Its newly made branches and seemed to move her top, as though a head.
There is a Haemonian grove which a steep forest
Encloses on all sides. They call it Tempe, through which Peneus,
Pouring out from deep Pindus, rolls forth with foaming water, 
And by its heavy fall forms clouds, stirring up thin mist,
It sprinkles the top of the trees with spray
And wearies more than the neighboring with its sound.
Here is the house, here the abode, here the innermost rooms of the great river.
Residing in these, a cave having been fashioned from the cliffs, 
He gives laws to the waves and the nymphs cherishing them.
There the popular rivers gather,
Not knowing whether to congratulate or console the father:
Poplar-fringed Spercheos, and restless Enipeus,
Old Eridanus, and gentle Amphrysos, and Aeas, 
Then the other rivers which, wherever their current carries them,
Lead down their waters, weary with wandering, into the sea.
One river, Inachus, is absent. Hidden away in his deep cave
He increases waters with weeping and most wretchedly
Mourns his daughter, Io, as though she were lost. He does not know if she lives
Or is among the shades. But whom he cannot find anywhere,
He thinks nowhere and fears worse things in his soul.
Jupiter had seen Io returning from her father’s stream
And said: “O maiden worthy of Jove and destined to make
Somebody happy in your bed, seek the shadows 
Of these or of these groves (and he had pointed out both of the groves)
While it is hot and the sun is highest in the midpoint of its circle.
But if you are afraid to enter the hiding places of wild beasts alone,
Safe under a god’s protection you will enter the inmost parts of the woods.
And not just any god, but one who holds the celestial scepter 
In the right hand, one who sends forth the roaming thunderbolts.
Do not flee me!”—for indeed she was fleeing. Now she had left behind
The pasture fields of Lerna, and Lycaean fields thickset with trees,
When the god hid the broad land in darkness brought in,
Stopped her flight, and took her uprightness. 
Meanwhile, Juno looked down into the middle of the fields,
And marveled that winged clouds made a semblance of night
Beneath the shining day; for she realized that they were neither of a river,
Nor were sent up by the moist earth.
She looked about to see where her husband might be, as one 
Who knew well the assignations of her husband caught so many times.
When she discovered he was not in heaven, she said:
“Either I am mistaken or I am wronged.” And slipping down from the lofty air,
She stood on the ground, and she ordered the clouds to withdraw.
He had sensed beforehand the coming of his wife and turned 
The face of the daughter of Inachus into a shining heifer.
Also as a cow she was beautiful. Saturnia approved,
Albeit grudgingly, the form of the cow, and then she asked
Whose, and whence, and from what herd it was, as though not knowing a true thing.
Jupiter lied and said she came from the earth, so that questions about the giver
Should stop. Saturn’s daughter sought her, a present.
What should he do? A cruel thing to repudiate his love,
But not to hand her over would be suspicious. Shame urged one course of action.
On this side, love discouraged. Shame would have been conquered by love.
But were the cow, so trifle a gift, refused to her, comrade of his race 
And of his bed, it could seem not to be a cow.
Although her rival was handed over, the goddess did not put aside at once
All suspicion, and she feared Jove and was worried about treachery,
Until she handed her over to be guarded by Argus Arestorides.
Argus had a head girt with one hundred lights. 
Whence two in turn took quiet,
The rest kept watch and remained on guard.
In whatever place she stood, he watched her.
Even with his back turned, he had Io before his eyes.
With light he allowed her to feed. When the sun is below the deep earth, 
He enclosed and he placed chains on her neck unworthy.
She fed on arboreal shoots and bitter plants,
And the poor wretch slept on the ground, often not having grass for a bed.
And she drank from muddy rivers.
When as a suppliant she wished to stretch forth her arms 
To Argus, she had no arms to stretch.
And attempting to lament, she brought forth moos from the mouth.
She feared the sounds and was terrified by her very voice.
And she came to the banks, those Inachian banks where she used to play,
And when she saw those new horns in the water, 
She was afraid, and, having terrified herself, she fled.
The Naiades did not know; Inachus himself knew not
Who she was. But she followed father and she followed sisters,
And suffered to be touched and offered herself to those admiring.
Old man Inachus proffered cropped herbs.
She licked the hands and kissed the palms of her father,
Nor did she hold back her tears. And if only words might be present,
She would ask for help and speak her name and fate.
A symbol stood for words which her foot made in the dust.
She told the sad tale of her changed body. 
“Woe is me!” her father Inachus exclaimed as he clung to the horns
Of the weeping one and the neck of the snow-white cow.
“Woe is me!” he groaned. “Are you my daughter,
Sought by me throughout the world? Unfound, you have been discovered.
You were a lighter grief. You are silent 
And do not reply to words. You only draw out a sigh in your lofty breast
And moo to my words, all you can do.
But I, unknowing, was preparing beds and torches for you,
I hoped first for a son-in-law and second for grandchildren.
Now your man will be from the herd, and from the herd must I look for grandchildren.
Nor am I permitted to put an end to such great sorrows with death.
But it is injurious to be a god. The door of death is closed
And will extend our grief into eternity.”
As he spoke so, starry-eyed Argus moved her
And snatched her away from her father and took the daughter to distant pasture.
He at a distance perched on the lofty peak
Of a mountain, whence sitting he looked about in all directions.
Nor was the ruler of the gods able to bear any longer
Such great sorrows of the Phoronian, and he called the son, whom
The shining Pleiad bore, and ordered him to kill Argus. 
Brief was the delay. He put on his winged sandals and took up
The sleep-inducing wand in his powerful hand and put his helmet on his head.
When he had arranged these things, the son of Jove jumped down
From his father’s citadel onto the earth. There he removed his helmet
And placed his wings, retaining only his wand. 
With this, like a shepherd, he drives goats through the out-of-the-way countryside—
Goats gathered while he journeyed—and played upon the pipes brought together.
The guardian appointed by Juno was taken with the sound of the new art
And said: “Whoever you are, you should break your journey with me on this rock.
Indeed nowhere is there richer grass for flocks, 
And you see shade just right for shepherds.”
Atlas’s offspring sat down, and he detained the passing day with speech,
And he tried to conquer the watching eyes
By singing on the reeds joined together.
He fights, however, to overcome gentle sleep, 
And though part of the eyes fall asleep,
Yet part stays awake. He asks (for the pipe had recently been invented)
Why it was invented.
Then the god said: “In the cold mountains of Thessaly,
There was a Naiad most renowned among Nonacrinian Hamadryads. 
The nymphs called her Syrinx.
Not once had she toyed with the satyrs who followed
And whatever other gods the shady woods
And the savage countryside had. She cherished the Ortygian goddess herself
In her pursuits and in her virginity. Girt in the manner of Diana, 
She could deceive and could be believed to be the Latonian,
Were it not for the fact that this one had a bow of cornel, that one a bow of gold.
Even so did she deceive. Pan, his head wreathed in sharp pine,
Saw her returning from Mount Lycaeus.
He spoke such words: ‘Nymph, yield to the wishes of the god 
Who wants to marry you.’” It remained to narrate more: a
How the nymph, with the entreaties rejected, fled through out-of-the-way places
Until she came to the placid river of tawny Ladon.
Here, since the waters impeded her crossing,
She prayed to her river-sisters to change her.
And Pan, when he thought that he had Syrinx pressed to him, 
Held marsh pipes instead of the body of the nymph.
And while he was sighing there, the winds, stirred in the pipe,
Made a slight sound like someone lamenting.
Touched by the new wonder and sweetness of the sound,
The god said: “This resolution* with you will remain to me.” 
And thus they retained the name of the girl,
Made from unequal reeds joined together by wax.
Intending to say such things, the Cyllenian saw that all the eyes
Yielded and were shut in sleep.
He checks his voice at once and strengthens sleep, 
Passing his medicinal wand over the droopy eyes.
No delay, he smites with hooked sword the nodding head
Just where it is adjacent to the neck, and casts it bloody down from the rock.
It tinges the jagged cliff with blood.
Argus, you lie low, and whatever light you had amongst so many eyes 
Has been put out, and one night seizes those hundred eyes.
Saturnia takes them up and places them in the feathers of her own bird,
And fills its tail with starry gems.
At once she blazed in anger. Nor did she put off the time of wrath.
She cast a terrifying Erinys before the eyes and spirit 
Of her Argive rival and buried blind goads in her breast,
And terrified her, a wanderer, through the entire world.
At last, Nile, you remained to her immense toil,
And as soon as she touched it, she flung herself down
On her knees on the edge of the bank, and with neck thrown back, 
She raised her face, which alone she was able to raise, to the lofty stars,
And by a groan, and tears, and a resounding* moo,
She seemed to lament with Jove and to ask for an end of evils.
Embracing his wife’s neck with his arms,
He begs at length to make an end to punishment, and says: 
“Place your fear. In future she will be no cause of pain to you.”
And he orders the Stygian marshes to hear this.
When the goddess was appeased, she took her former face
And became what she had been. The coat falls from the body,
Her horns decrease, and the orb of her eye grows more restricted. 
Her jaw is drawn in, her shoulders and hands return,
Her hoof, split, assumes five fingernails.
She retains nothing of the cow except the glistening of the form in her.
The nymph, happy to use her two feet,
Stands erect and fears to speak lest in the manner of a cow 
She would moo. She timidly keeps in check the words long abandoned.
Now a most renowned goddess, she is worshipped by the crowd engendered from the Nile.
Then Epaphus is believed to be born at length from the seed of mighty Jove,
And he holds temples joined to his parent.
Phaethon, born from the sun, was equal to this one in spirit and years. 
When this one was speaking great things and refused to yield to him,
Proud of father Phoebus, the grandson of Inachus could not stand it, and said:
“You are a fool to believe mother in all things,
And you are swelled up with notions of your false father.”
Phaethon blushed and suppressed his wrath because of shame, 
And carried the insults of Epaphus to mother Clymene,
And said: “By how much the more you may grieve, mother, indeed I, frank,
He, arrogant, I said nothing. This insult shames us
That it could be uttered and not refuted.
But you, if now I am sprung from heavenly seed, 
Give proof of such great lineage and justify my claims of divinity.”
He spoke, and he encircled his arms about his mother’s neck,
And on his own life and that of Merops and the marriage beds of his sisters,
He begged to give him some indication of the truth.
It is uncertain whether Clymene was more moved by the prayers of Phaethon
Or by anger of the sin imputed to her. She stretched forth both arms
To the sky and gazing at the light of the sun,
Said: “By this orb splendid with shining rays,
Who both sees and hears us now, I swear to you, my son,
That you are sprung from him, whom you behold, from him who warms the world.
If I tell falsehoods, may he not show himself to me.
And may this light be the most recent to our eyes.
Nor is it hard to find your father’s household gods.
The place whence he rises borders our own land.
If you have a mind, make the journey and make inquiry of him yourself!” 
At once Phaethon leaps for joy at his mother’s words,
Grasping the heavens in imagination.
He crosses his own Ethiopians and the Indians placed under the fires of the star,
And quickly comes to his paternal rising places.